Add article on Flare system architecture (#20)
optakt/optakt.github.io: content/knowledge/flare_architecure.md

The purpose of the Avalanche platform:

* creation of subnets and blockchains tied to the main Avalanche network for general and corporate purposes;
* creation and hosting of decentralized applications;
* creation of smart assets (for example, new financial derivatives and DeFi solutions).

### Subnets

Everything on Avalanche is a _subnet_, and every chain is part of a subnet.
A Subnet, or Subnetwork, is a dynamic set of validators working together to achieve consensus on the state of a set of blockchains.
Each blockchain is validated by exactly one Subnet.
A Subnet can validate arbitrarily many blockchains.
Before any of the Subnets can become a member of the network, it must stake some AVAX tokens.
Clients interact with Avalanche through API calls to nodes (each chain has its [own API](https://docs.avax.network/build/avalanchego-apis/README)).

There is a special subnet called the _Primary Network_, which validates Avalanche's built-in blockchains.
A node may be a member of arbitrarily many Subnets and must be part of the primary network.
The Primary Network contains three build-in blockchains: P-Chain, C-Chain, and X-Chain.

> In total, the Avalanche ecosystem (as of the end of December 2021) operates 13 subnets and 10 blockchains (three main plus 7 minor ones: Dtehereum, Btehereum, C and X-chain PoW, and others).

Reviewer: Since the number of subnets is higher than number of blockchains, what do the extra subnets do exactly? 
Or in other words, what else do subnets do apart from validating blockchains?

> In total, the Avalanche ecosystem (as of the end of December 2021) operates 13 subnets and 10 blockchains (three main plus 7 minor ones: Dtehereum, Btehereum, C and X-chain PoW, and others).

Author: Interestingly they just exist there and I guess do nothing https://avascan.info/blockchains?subnet=2TSYtJmLdmBJCTcEP6ZeQ3d7urg1GbrKtVMMdd7nmz46z22PSC

Once these criteria are met and that data is available, then the stored transactions in the storage contract are now available to be referenced by any other contract on the Flare Network.

## Flare Time Series Oracle (FTSO)

The FTSO provides externally sourced data estimates to the Flare Network in a decentralized manner.
It does so by leveraging the distributed nature of the network and its participants.
It generates rewards for active network participants and holders of Spark (FLR) via Signal Providers and F-Asset holders.

The FTSO gets external data from Signal Providers (or Oracles) in the blockchain world.
Signal Providers exist in the off-chain to collect data, such as asset prices, and deliver it to the FTSO.
Signal providers on the Flare Network are responsible for delivering continuous and accurate data estimates to the FTSO to represent off-chain values on the Flare Network.
Signal providers can provide their F-Asset and FLR votes to do this, but they also can receive delegated votes from other parties to perform this service on their behalf.

> Signal providers may take fees for this service.

Reviewer 2: Let's be clear that signal providers receive a reward for accurately voting on prices, as determined by the algorithm. The top and bottom 25% of prices are discarded, and the average of the remaining is used. The 50% of price providers who are closest than receive rewards for their own tokens plus the percentage of fees, as defined by them on the smart contract. The default is 20%, and they can change it in 5% increments/decrements.

> Additionally, the entire process is noncustodial.

Reviewer: What exactly does `noncustodial` mean this case?

The FTSO ensures the data is fair and accurate and then makes the data available to network applications.

More details regarding how FTSO constructs the prices can be found in [Constructing price distributions](https://flare.xyz/ftso-a-breakdown/) section.

## F-Asset System

The F-Asset System is an integral application on the Flare Network.
It facilitates the trustless issuance of asset value onto the Flare Network.
An F-Asset is a representation of an asset from another blockchain on the Flare Network via the State Connector System, i.e.XRP = FXRP.
Every F-Asset minted through the F-Asset System has a 2.5x collateral-backing in FLR, which is denominated in USD.
Agents are responsible for posting and maintaining the FLR collateral.
Additionally, they are responsible for answering redemptions, when users decide they want to have their underlying asset back.
XRP, Litecoin, Dogecoin, and Stellar are the first four F-Assets and the addition of more is subject to FLR holder governance.

> F-Asset System gives the supported cryptos the capability to run smart contracts without any changes to the underlying blockchain.

Reviewer 2: The F-Asset system.

> The reason to do so is that nearly 75% of the value on public blockchains cannot be currently used in a trustless manner with smart contracts.

Reviewer: According to [Flare's website](https://flare.xyz/) it is 65% now. I remember it being 75% before though.

Two important parties in the F-Asset System are responsible for issuing F-Assets: Agents and Originators.
An originator is a person or an institution that wants to convert their cryptocurrency into an F-asset, and an agent (more likely to be an institution) is a participant on the Flare network that issues the F-asset desired by the originator.
Agents are also responsible for posting and managing the FLR collateral used to back the minting of F-Assets.

> Additionally, as F-Asset holders have the right to claim the underlying asset, the agents are responsible for honoring redemptions promptly.

Reviewer 2: I think we should add a small paragraph on what happens when things go wrong as well. For instance, if an agent doesn't honour a redemption, he is slashed, and the redeemer is refunded in Spark tokens (plus a certain bonus) instead, which which he can then buy the underlying asset on the market.

That is, if it needs to be able to compare any two transactions and determine which came first, it can't use a DAG because the ordering of some transactions is not defined.

#### X-Chain

The X-Chain functions as a decentralized network for creating and trading digital assets and uses the Avalanche consensus protocol.
The X-Chain uses a DAG with the full Avalanche consensus protocol, so it is UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) based.
UTXO-based systems are inherently more scalable than account-based systems.
They are naturally parallelizable, whereas account-based systems must lock around the account to process transactions.
It is a real-world representation of assets such as bonds and equity with specific rules that govern their actions.
Whenever you initiate a transaction on the Avalanche blockchain, you get to pay a fee in AVAX.
The Exchange Chain is an Avalanche Virtual Machine (AVM) example.
Clients can create and trade assets on the X-Chain and other examples of the AVM with the help of the X-Chain API.

## Flare's FBA

> _TODO_ add more details to each of the items

Reviewer 3: Our rule at Optakt is that any TODO should come with a GitHub issue referenced with the TODO, while FIXMEs are for things that will not be done in an issue, but then they should be solved before the PR is ever merged.

Author: I've added an issue to the repo

* Safety only depends on an underlying chain's validators: no trusted third-party service has its own set of economic incentives and risks.
  The need for trust is minimized by leveraging the guarantee that safety can only be lost in the state connector if an underlying chain's validators encounter a Byzantine fault.
* No cooperation is needed from an underlying chain's validators: validators from an underlying chain do not need to modify their chain's codebase to permit Flare to interpret their network.
  An underlying chain's validators do not even need to know that Flare exists for the state connector system to operate.
* Can read the state of any blockchain: the state connector can operate on any possible Sybil-resistance technique of an underlying chain.
* Constant-sized proofs: both the data availability proof and the payment proof are constant-sized, independent of the number of other payments in the data availability period being considered.

### Voting

> There are three phases of the state connector voting protocol:
> 
> * Request
> * Commit
> * Reveal

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The state connector voting protocol is split into three phases, described in the following sub-sections.
```

WDYT? I feel like this list is a bit redundant with the sections below, since it just lists the names of the sections.

Author: Fixed.

This section contains information about some parts of the Flare Network.
In addition, it also contains some information regarding the Avalanche platform, since Flare adopted some of its parts within its ecosystem.

## Avalanche Platform

Avalanche is an open-source platform for launching decentralized applications and enterprise blockchain deployments in one interoperable, highly scalable ecosystem.
It's a platform with a new approach to scaling that allows for fast finality of transactions and adopted to run Solidity out-of-the-box.

A key difference between Avalanche and other decentralized networks is the consensus protocol.
The Avalanche protocol employs a novel approach to a consensus to achieve its strong safety guarantees, quick finality, and high throughput without compromising decentralization.

The purpose of the Avalanche platform:

* creation of subnets and blockchains tied to the main Avalanche network for general and corporate purposes;
* creation and hosting of decentralized applications;
* creation of smart assets (for example, new financial derivatives and DeFi solutions).

### Subnets

Everything on Avalanche is a _subnet_, and every chain is part of a subnet.

> A subnet, or subnetwork, is a dynamic set of validators working together to achieve consensus on the state of a set of blockchains.

Author: I think two options are correct here.

A node may be a member of arbitrarily many subnets and must be part of the primary network.
The primary network contains three build-in blockchains: P-Chain, C-Chain, and X-Chain.

In total, the Avalanche ecosystem (as of the end of December 2021) operates 13 subnets and 10 blockchains (three main plus 7 minor ones: Dtehereum, Btehereum, C and X-chain PoW, and others).

All the details regarding the operation of the platform, tutorials, and tools are described in the [official Avalanche website](https://docs.avax.network/build/tutorials/platform/create-a-subnet/.)

#### P-Chain

The Platform Chain is the metadata blockchain on Avalanche and coordinates validators, keeps track of active subnets, and enables the creation of new subnets.
The P-Chain uses a UTXO (Unspent transaction output) model and implements the Snowman consensus protocol.
The reason P-Chain doesn't implement DAG is that linear chains give you a well-defined notion of time, but DAG does not.
This is necessary to add/remove a validator from the validator set at some given time.

#### C-Chain

With the C-Chain API, clients can create smart contracts.

> It is an example of the Ethereum Virtual Machine that is powered by the Avalanche Chain.

Author: Actually, EVM is implemented on this chain, allowing Avalanche developers to fork over EVM-compatible DApps.

Therefore, it makes it easy for Ethereum developers to easily port applications into the Avalanche chain.
C-Chain uses an account-based Snowman Consensus Protocol since an application requires a total ordering of transactions and runs consensus on blocks, not transactions.
That is, if it needs to be able to compare any two transactions and determine which came first, it can't use a DAG because the ordering of some transactions is not defined.

#### X-Chain

The X-Chain functions as a decentralized network for creating and trading digital assets and uses the Avalanche consensus protocol.
The X-Chain uses a DAG with the full Avalanche consensus protoco, so it is UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) based.
UTXO-based systems are inherently more scalable than account-based systems.
They are naturally parallelizable whereas account-based systems must lock around the account to process transactions.
It is a real-world representation of a resource such as bonds and equity with specific rules that govern their actions.
Whenever you initiate a transaction on the Avalanche blockchain, you get to pay a fee in AVAX.

> The Exchange Chain is an example of the Avalanche Virtual Machine (AVM).

Author: Yes, I've added that. Thanks!

Clients can create and trade assets on the X-Chain and other examples of the AVM with the help of the X-Chain API.

## Flare's FBA

TODO add more details to each if the items

Flare uses some parts of the Avalanche codebase with some changes:

* deactivate most of the P-Chain and X-Chain functionality;
* run the C-Chain with a locally defined set of validators instead of using the P-Chain for the list of validators;
* hijack the EVM state transition to implement Flare state connector functionality; and
* implement the rest of the Flare systems on top of the C-Chain as Solidity smart contracts.

## State Connector

The state connector – Flare’s system to observe the state of underlying chains.

> State connector is one of the most critical protocols on the Flare Network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The State Connector is one of the most critical protocols on the Flare Network.
```

The state connector enables smart contracts on Flare to act on state changes from underlying blockchains, for example payments.

> The state connector adopts other blockchains’ consensus mechanisms and validator ecosystems.

Author: I think Max suggested to use lowercase here

### Advantages

A [state connector System](https://docs.flare.network/en/state-connector) is a competitive approach for proving the state of an underlying chain to a smart contract, and it has the following advantages:

* Transaction validity references back to an underlying chain's genesis block: Other approaches like the SPV (Simplified Payment Verification) proof do not check the validity of a transaction, because it is considered harmful for proving the state of an underlying chain to another network.
* Safety only depends on an underlying chain's validators: There is no trusted third-party service that has its own set of economic incentives and risks.

>   Need for trust is minimized by leveraging the guarantee that safety can only be lost in the state connector if an underlying chain's validators encounter a Byzantine fault.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Need for trust is minimized by leveraging the guarantee that safety can only be lost in the State Connector if an underlying chain's validators encounter a Byzantine fault.
```

> * No cooperation needed from an underlying chain's validators: Validators from an underlying chain do not need to modify their chain's codebase to permit Flare to interpret their network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* No cooperation needed from an underlying chain's validators: validators from an underlying chain do not need to modify their chain's codebase to permit Flare to interpret their network.
```

>   An underlying chain's validators do not even need to be aware that Flare exists for the state connector system to operate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  An underlying chain's validators do not even need to be aware that Flare exists for the State Connector system to operate.
```

> * Can read the state of any blockchain: The state connector can operate on any possible Sybil-resistance technique of an underlying chain.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Can read the state of any blockchain: the State Connector can operate on any possible Sybil-resistance technique of an underlying chain.
```

  For example proof-of-work, proof-of-stake, and even federated byzantine agreement where there is no global agreement on the set of validators in control of a network.
* Constant-sized proofs: both the data availability proof and the payment proof are constant-sized, independent of the number of other payments in the data availability period being considered.

### Design

> The state connector is built into the validators.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The State Connector is built into the validators.
```

These validators (or validation nodes) are tasked with ordering transactions and confirming validity for consensus plus digesting state changes from integrated blockchains.
Validators on the Flare Network operate on the ecosystem as well as the integrated blockchains’ ecosystems.

### Voting

There are three phases of the state connector voting protocol:

* Request
* Commit
* Reveal

#### Request Phase

> At any point in time, any user can submit a request to the state connector contract to have an event proven.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At any point in time, any user can submit a request to the State Connector contract to have an event proven.
```

> The window in time that this request enters the network state is known as the request phase from its perspective.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The time window that this request enters the network state is known as the request phase from its perspective.
```
or just time interval

#### Commit Phase

> During the next window of time, attestation providers have the opportunity to commit a hidden vote regarding their belief in the outcome of the events requested in the previous phase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
During the next time window, attestation providers have the opportunity to commit a hidden vote regarding their belief in the outcome of the events requested in the previous phase.
```
and below

Anyone may operate as an attestation provider without any capital requirement, but a default incentivised set is used as the minimal requirement for passing a vote about the events in the previous set.

#### Reveal Phase

Finally, in the next window of time, attestation providers reveal their votes that they committed to in the previous round.
Once this reveal phase concludes and the next phase begins, the revealed votes are automatically counted and all valid events become immediately available to all contracts on Flare.
Once these criteria are met and that data is available, the stored transactions in the storage contract are now available to be referenced by any other contract on the Flare Network.

### Branching

> The state connector branching protocol protects Flare against incorrect interpretation of real-world events, proactively, such that there are never any rollbacks on the Flare blockchain state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The State Connector branching protocol protects Flare against incorrect interpretation of real-world events, proactively, such that there are never any rollbacks on the Flare blockchain state.
```

Instead of having rollbacks, contention on state correctness is handled via automatic state branching into a correct and incorrect path.

> The security assumption is that if you as an independent node operator are following along with the correct real-world state, then you will always end up on the correct branch of the blockchain state.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The security assumption is that if you, as an independent node operator, are following along with the correct real-world state, then you will always end up on the correct branch of the blockchain state.
```

## Flare Time Series Oracle (FTSO)

The [FTSO](https://flare.xyz/ftso-a-breakdown/) provides externally sourced data estimates (e.g. the current price of XRP) to the Flare Network in a decentralized manner.
It does so by leveraging the distributed nature of the network and its participants.
At the moment, only Spark holders get to vote; in the future, each asset's voting power will be split 50-50 between Spark holders and the holders of the particular asset.

Signal providers exist in the off-chain to collect data, such as asset prices, and deliver it to the FTSO.
As an example, a provider may collect the price of XRP/$ from three different exchanges, average the price and have this price estimate ready for the FTSO every voting round to submit.

> Signal providers on the Flare Network are responsible for delivering continuous and accurate data estimates to the FTSO to represent off-chain values on the Flare Network.

Reviewer 4: IMO this should be the first sentence for signal providers, because it explains what are they

Signal providers may take fees for this service.
Additionally, the entire process is noncustodial (i.e. participants retain full control of their own data).
The FTSO ensures the data is fair and accurate and makes it available to network applications.

Additional info and some implementation details are available in [this example of price provider](https://github.com/flare-foundation/FTSO-price-provider).

### Delegation

Anyone can submit price data to the FTSO and vote for their price estimate.
This may require some level to effort and technical skills to build such a provider.
Most Spark and F-Asset holders can delegate their tokens to an FTSO provider who they trust will provide accurate price estimates.
The delegation will be as simple as logging into a Flare wallet, choosing an FTSO provider, and finally selecting the amount tokens they wish to delegate.

### Rewards

Signal providers receive a reward for accurately voting on prices, as determined by the algorithm.

The top and bottom 25% of prices are discarded, and the average of the remaining is used.

> The 50% of price providers who are closest to the price than receive rewards for their own tokens plus the percentage of fees, as defined by them on the smart contract.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The 50% of price providers who are closest to the price receive rewards for their own tokens plus the percentage of fees, as defined by them on the smart contract.
```

The default is 20%, and they can change it in 5% increments/decrements.

> The exact amount of compensation is  based on the number of delegated tokens minus a fee set by the FTSO provider.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The exact amount of compensation is based on the number of delegated tokens minus a fee set by the FTSO provider.
```

For example, Alice, Bob and Charlie choose to delegate their Spark tokens, 1000, 500 & 800 respectively for a total of 2,300 Spark delegated to FTSO Provider _X_.
FTSO Provider _X_ submits their price estimate for the round and wins using their proprietary price estimate.
Say, 100 Spark is awarded as compensation to FTSO Provider _X_.
The provider will take 10 Spark as a fee (10%) and divide the rest of the 90 tokens to the delegators based on their stake ratio (delegators stake / total Spark delegated to FTSO Provider _X_).
Thus, Alice gets 43.5% (39.15 Spark), Bob gets 21.7% (19.53 Spark) and Charlie gets 34.8% (31.32 Spark).
Note: Only Spark delegators are compensated, F-Asset votes are not compensated by the FTSO.

## F-Asset System

> The F-Asset System is an integral application on the Flare Network.

Reviewer 4: Where the name F-Asset comes from? Flare Asset?

Author: I couldn't find the origin behind the name, but I think it is indeed short form of Flare Asset

> It facilitates the trustless issuance of asset value onto the Flare Network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It facilitates the trustless issuance of asset values onto the Flare Network.
```

> An F-Asset is a representation of an asset from another blockchain on the Flare Network via the state connector system, i.e.XRP = FXRP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An F-Asset is a representation of an asset from another blockchain on the Flare Network via the State Connector system, i.e.XRP = FXRP.
```

Agents are responsible for posting and maintaining the FLR collateral.
Additionally, they are responsible for answering redemptions, when users decide they want to have their underlying asset back.
XRP, Litecoin, Dogecoin, and Stellar are the first four F-Assets and the addition of more is subject to FLR holder governance.

The F-Asset system gives the supported cryptos the capability to run smart contracts without any changes to the underlying blockchain.
The reason to do so is that nearly 65% of the value on public blockchains cannot be currently used in a trustless manner with smart contracts.

> Two important parties in the F-Asset System are responsible for issuing F-Assets: Agents and Originators.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Two important parties in the F-Asset System are responsible for issuing F-Assets: agents and originators.
```

# Flare Architecture

This section contains information about some parts of the Flare Network.

> In addition, some information regarding Avalanche Platform is also present, since Flare adopted some parts of the Avalanche in it's own ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, it also contains some information regarding the Avalanche platform, since Flare adopted some of its parts within its own ecosystem.
```

WDYT?

## Avalanche Platform

Avalanche is an open-source platform for launching decentralized applications and enterprise blockchain deployments in one interoperable, highly scalable ecosystem.
Avalanche is the first decentralized smart contracts platform built for the scale of global finance, with near-instant transaction finality.
Ethereum's developers can quickly build on Avalanche as Solidity works out-of-the-box.

A key difference between Avalanche and other decentralized networks is the consensus protocol.
The Avalanche protocol employs a novel approach to a consensus to achieve its strong safety guarantees, quick finality, and high-throughput without compromising decentralization.

The purpose of Avalanche platform:

* creation of subnets and blockchains tied to the main Avalanche network for general and corporate purposes;
* creation and hosting of decentralized applications;

> * creation of smart assets (for example, new financial derivatives and DeFi solutions).

Reviewer 3: This part is excellent.

### Subnets

Everything on Avalanche is a _subnet_, and every chain is part of a subnet.
There is a special subnet called the _Primary Network_, which validates Avalanche's built-in blockchains.
Validators are required to be a member of the Primary Network; all other subnets are optional.
Each subnet can have multiple blockchains just like the primary avalanche network.
The Primary Network contains three build-in blockchains:

* Platform Chain or P-Chain (manages the subnets, coordinates all the validator nodes and the staking mechanism)
* Contract Chain or C-Chain (network for working with smart contracts)
* Exchange Chain or X-Chain (meant for creation, management and transaction of tokens on the network – based on DAG a unique kind of consensus model)

> In total, the Avalanche ecosystem (as of the end of Decemner 2021) operates 13 subnets and 10 blockchains (three main plus 7 minor ones: Dtehereum, Btehereum, C and X-chain PoW and others).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In total, the Avalanche ecosystem (as of the end of December 2021) operates 13 subnets and 10 blockchains (three main plus 7 minor ones: Dtehereum, Btehereum, C and X-chain PoW and others).
```

All the details regarding the operation of the platform, tutorials and tools are described in the [official Avalanche website](https://docs.avax.network/build/tutorials/platform/create-a-subnet/.)

### Avalanche Consensus Protocol

> Avalanche Platform reach a consensus by using Avalanche Consensus Protocol.
> It has three mechanisms that give structural support to the network.
> These are the non-BFT protocol (Slush) that progressively built up to Snowflake and Snowball.
> These are single-decree consensus protocols with increasing robustness and are all based on the common majority-based metastable voting mechanism.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Avalanche platform uses the Avalanche Consensus Protocol.
It has three mechanisms that give structural support to the network:

* the non-BFT protocol (Slush) — that progressively built up to Snowflake and Snowball;
* single-decree consensus protocols with increasing robustness which are all based on the common majority-based metastable voting mechanism;
* <insert missing mechanism?>
```

I feel like this paragraph could gain from being restructured. Also you mention three mechanisms but unless I misunderstood what you meant, I only see two of them there.

Avalanche is considered to be a sort of layered consensus protocol and can be broken down into:

* Slush
* Snowflake
* Snowball
* Avalanche

> I'll keep this part brief and more detailed explanations can be found in the links provided at the end of this section.

Reviewer 3: Please refrain from using the first person.

```suggestion
More detailed explanations are provided at the end of this section.
```

> To understand how the algorithm works, here is a simple example.
> We start with a _slush_.
> Let's say, we have 16 nodes and the network has received a malicious transaction.
> Now these nodes should 'vote' whether this transaction is valid (the sender has sufficient funds in this case).
> Another assumption is that several of these nodes are malicious (I run them in the network to get my transaction through) or they are out-of-date (information they have regarding the state of the network is a bit obsolete).
> To achieve an agreement regarding the transaction, each node picks several other nodes randomly, and they have a vote.
> Each node can repeat this process several times to achieve a final agreement.
> However, after each voting, the node can change its preferences depending on the decision made by the majority.
> This can potentially make the process stuck at some point because the nodes can not achieve consensus.
> To break this loop, _snowflake_ comes into play.
> Each node has a counter to keep track of the votes.
> Each time the node votes with the same preference, counter increments.
> If the node changes its preference, the counter goes to zero and the node starts the process from the beginning.
> It will do so until the number of consequence votes reaches some defined threshold.
> This however can slow down the voting process, especially if the network has a big amount of malicious nodes.
> To speed this up, _snowball_ upgrades snowflake's counters to 'confidence' counters.
> Two counters hold information about the 'positive' and 'negative' votes.
> After some number of votes, the algorithm compares two counters and makes a decision based on that.
> This speeds up the voting process and dramatically decreases the probability of the voting process getting stuck.
> The final part is the Avalanche algorithm that generalizes the snowball and maintains the DAG (direct acyclic graph).
> DAG is a critical part because it prevents double-spends.
> Because in DAG the transactions are appended to one another, a vote for one transaction implicitly means a vote for all the transactions it is appended to.
> When the transaction is being created, it holds the information about one or more parent transactions.
> Each node then can check the transaction and all the ancestors and decide whether to accept or reject the transaction.
> In addition, the node queries each transaction only once.
> A final decision is made if the transaction is present in the consequent queries and has descendants (in case there are two conflicting transactions, one with more descendants will more likely to be accepted, because it will appear in more queries than another).

Reviewer 3: Since the purpose of this document is to be a technical document, I'd suggest avoiding any form of story-telling examples, and to focus on a more factual/down-to-earth approach. It is also recommended to avoid using subjective terms like _a bit_, and to avoid using the future tense.

For example here, this could be changed to:

```suggestion
The following is an example of how the Avalanche Consensus Protocol behaves:

If a 16 nodes network receives a malicious transaction while using the Slush consensus protocol, its nodes 'vote' on whether this transaction is valid (the sender has sufficient funds in this case).
If several of these nodes are malicious or they are out-of-date (information they have regarding the state of the network is obsolete).
To achieve an agreement regarding the transaction, each node picks several other nodes randomly, and they have a vote <insert what the vote determines, here>.
Each node can repeat this process several times to achieve a final agreement.
However, after each voting, nodes can change their preferences depending on the decision made by the majority.
This can potentially halt the process if the nodes can not achieve consensus.

To solve this issue, _snowflake_ comes into play.
Each node has a counter to keep track of the votes.
Each time a node votes with the same preference, counter increments.
If the node changes its preference, the counter goes to zero and the node starts the process from the beginning.
It does so until the number of consequence votes reaches some defined threshold.
This, however, can slow down the voting process, especially if the network has a substantial amount of malicious nodes.

To speed this up, _snowball_ upgrades snowflake's counters to 'confidence' counters.
Two counters hold information about the 'positive' and 'negative' votes.
After some number of votes, the algorithm compares two counters and makes a decision based on that.
This speeds up the voting process and dramatically decreases the probability of the voting process getting stuck.

The final part is the Avalanche algorithm that generalizes the snowball and maintains the DAG (direct acyclic graph).
DAG is a critical part because it prevents double-spends.
Because in DAG the transactions are appended to one another, a vote for one transaction implicitly means a vote for all the transactions it is appended to.
When the transaction is being created, it holds the information about one or more parent transactions.
Each node then can check the transaction and all the ancestors and decide whether to accept or reject the transaction.
In addition, the node queries each transaction only once.
A final decision is made if the transaction is present in the consequent queries and has descendants (if there are two conflicting transactions, the one with more descendants is more likely to be accepted, because it appears in more queries than another).
```

What are consequence votes? This term is used but never explained. I would suggest either adding a link, or briefly explaining it. The same goes about the DAG, unless it's already in a glossary somewhere (which I think it might be) in which case we probably want to link to the glossary.

A more detailed description regarding the Avalanche consensus algorithm can be found using the following links:

* [Official Avalanche Consensus page](https://docs.avax.network/learn/platform-overview/avalanche-consensus)
* [Step-by-step guide](https://devashishdxt.github.io/notebook/avalanche_consensus.html) of how consensus is reached.

> * Some [examples](https://medium.com/@vardan.sevan/avalanche-examples-of-consensus-protocols-9ddc5b006264) how the consensus protocol is applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Some [examples](https://medium.com/@vardan.sevan/avalanche-examples-of-consensus-protocols-9ddc5b006264) about how the consensus protocol is applied.
```

### Avalanche Subnet

A Subnet, or Subnetwork, is a dynamic set of validators working together to achieve consensus on the state of a set of blockchains.
Each blockchain is validated by exactly one Subnet.

> A Subnet can validate arbitrarily many blockchains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Subnet can arbitrarily validate many blockchains.
```

> A node may be a member of arbitrarily many Subnets and must be part of the primary network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A node may be a member of many Subnets and must be part of the primary network.
```

> Before any of the Subnets can become a member of the network, it must stake some AVAX tokens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before any of the Subnets can become a member of the network, they must stake some AVAX tokens.
```

> Clients interact with Avalanche through APIs calls to nodes (each chain has its [own API](https://docs.avax.network/build/avalanchego-apis/README)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Clients interact with Avalanche through API calls to nodes (each chain has its [own API](https://docs.avax.network/build/avalanchego-apis/README)).
```

The Platform Chain is the metadata blockchain on Avalanche and coordinates validators, keeps track of active subnets, and enables the creation of new subnets.
The Platform Chain implements the Snowman consensus protocol.

#### C-Chain

With the C-Chain API, clients can create smart contracts.
It is an example of the Ethereum Virtual Machine that is powered by the Avalanche Chain.
The C-Chain also serves as the default smart contract blockchain of the Avalanche chain.
C-Chain is also very compatible with the Solidity smart contract as well as Ethereum tooling.
Therefore, it makes it easy for Ethereum developers to easily port applications into the Avalanche chain.

#### X-Chain

The X-Chain functions as a decentralized network for creating and trading digital assets.
It is a representation of a real-world resource such as bonds and equity with specific rules that govern their actions.
Whenever you initiate a transaction on the Avalanche blockchain, you get to pay a fee in AVAX.
The Exchange Chain is an example of the Avalanche Virtual Machine (AVM).
Clients can create and trade assets on the X-Chain and other examples of the AVM with the help of the X-Chain API.

## Flare's FBA

> TODO: add how Flare hijacks the codebase to run FBA on it.

Author: Need to fill this section

## State Connector

> The State Connector – Flare’s system to observe the state of underlying chains.
> State Connector is one of the most critical protocols on the Flare Network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The State Connector is Flare’s system to observe the state of underlying chains, and it is one of the most critical protocols on the Flare Network.
```

> The purpose of a state connector is to connect non-flare assets (like XRP, Dode, LTC, etc.) with the Flare Network (represented by F-Assets) in a trustless manner, or other words, allow the smart contracts on Flare to act on state changes from underlying blockchains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Its purpose is to connect non-flare assets (like XRP, Dode, LTC, etc.) with the Flare Network (represented by F-Assets) in a trustless manner, or in other words, to allow the smart contracts on Flare to act on state changes from underlying blockchains.
```

The State Connector adopts other blockchains’ consensus mechanisms and validator ecosystems.

### Advantages

A state connector system is a competitive approach for proving the state of an underlying chain to a smart contract, and it has the following advantages:

> * Transaction validity references back to an underlying chain's genesis block: Other approaches like the SPV (Simplified Payment Verification) proof does not check the validity of a transaction, because it is considered harmful for proving the state of an underlying chain to another network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Transaction validity references back to an underlying chain's genesis block: Other approaches like the SPV (Simplified Payment Verification) proof do not check the validity of a transaction, because it is considered harmful for proving the state of an underlying chain to another network.
```

  An underlying chain's validators do not even need to be aware that Flare exists for the state connector system to operate.
* Can read the state of any blockchain: The state connector can operate on any possible Sybil-resistance technique of an underlying chain.
  For example proof-of-work, proof-of-stake, and even federated byzantine agreement where there is no global agreement on the set of validators in control of a network.
* No encoding of the current validators in control of an underlying chain to a smart contract on Flare: This requirement of other state-relay approaches such as the SPV proof leads to the hazardous scenario where the enforcement of bad behavior in relaying state needs to be conducted by the same set of operators that have performed the bad behavior.
* Constant-sized proofs: both the data availability proof and the payment proof are constant-sized, independent of the number of other payments in the data availability period being considered.
* Every Flare validator independently verifies an underlying chain's state: If your Flare validator observes the canonical state of an underlying chain, then you will not lose safety against that chain.

### Design

> State Connector is built into the validators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The State Connector is built into the validators.
```

Reviewer: So attestors (which can also be price providers of FTSO but don't have to be) constitute the state connector system?

> These validators (or validation nodes) are tasked with ordering transactions and confirming validity for consensus plus digesting state changes from integrated blockchains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These validators (or validation nodes) are tasked with ordering transactions and confirming validity for consensus as well as digesting state changes from integrated blockchains.
```

Validators on the Flare Network operate on the ecosystem as well as the integrated blockchains’ ecosystems.

The validation process consists of two stages:

> * congestion control by agreement on data availability
> * proving a transaction

Reviewer 3: For consistency between both sentences, this should either be

```suggestion
* congestion control by agreement on data availability
* transaction proof generation
```

or

```suggestion
* controlling congestion by agreeing on data availability
* proving a transaction
```

#### Congestion Control by Agreement on Data Availability

In this stage, validators agree on the state of the underlying chain.
This process of tracking state change availability occurs via a smart contract on the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) level.

> The integrated blockchain validators can submit a valid claim availability proof in a competition to be first but only allows them to do so again after the timeout period has ended since the last valid claim availability proof.

Reviewer 3: IMO this sentence should be rephrased because I'm not sure what you meant.

Additionally, a fee to submit the availability proofs is required to prevent attacking and spamming.
The timeout period, fee, and count of finalized blocks from the integrated blockchains can all be changed via governance.

> #### Proving a Transaction

Reviewer 3: This should also probably be changed to

```suggestion
#### Transaction Proof Generation
```

After enough validators agree on the state of the network (data availability proof), validators need to approve the transaction.

> Validators will agree/disagree on the validity of the transaction using the Federated Byzantine Agreement for the network to reach a consensus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Validators use the Federated Byzantine Agreement to reach a consensus on whether the transaction is valid.
```

Reviewer: More details of the `merkle trie` would be great as I am missing the context here. Is it for the underlying blockchain?

> Once these criteria are met and that data is available, then the stored transactions in the storage contract are now available to be referenced by any other contract on the Flare Network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once these criteria are met and that data is available, the stored transactions in the storage contract are now available to be referenced by any other contract on the Flare Network.
```

## Flare Time Series Oracle (FTSO)

> The FTSO provides externally sourced data estimates to the Flare Network in a decentralized manner.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The FTSO provides externally-sourced data estimates to the Flare Network in a decentralized manner.
```

It does so by leveraging the distributed nature of the network and its participants.
It generates rewards for active network participants and holders of Spark (FLR) via Signal Providers and F-Asset holders.

The FTSO gets external data from Signal Providers (or Oracles) in the blockchain world.
Signal Providers exist in the off-chain to collect data, such as asset prices, and deliver it to the FTSO.
Signal providers on the Flare Network are responsible for delivering continuous and accurate data estimates to the FTSO to represent off-chain values on the Flare Network.
Signal providers can provide their F-Asset and FLR votes to do this, but they also can receive delegated votes from other parties to perform this service on their behalf.
Signal providers may take fees for this service.
Additionally, the entire process is noncustodial.

> The FTSO ensures the data is fair and accurate and then makes the data available to network applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The FTSO ensures the data is fair and accurate and makes it available to network applications.
```

> More details regarding how FTSO constructs the prices can be found in [Constructing price distributions](https://flare.xyz/ftso-a-breakdown/) section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More details regarding how FTSO constructs the prices can be found in the [Constructing price distributions](https://flare.xyz/ftso-a-breakdown/) section.
```

## F-Asset System

The F-Asset System is an integral application on the Flare Network.
It facilitates the trustless issuance of asset value onto the Flare Network.

> An F-Asset is a representation of an asset from another blockchain on the Flare Network via the State Connector System, i.e.XRP = FXRP.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An F-Asset is a representation of an asset from another blockchain on the Flare Network via the State Connector System, i.e. `XRP = FXRP`.
```

> Every F-Asset minted through the F-Asset System has a 2.5x collateral-backing in FLR, which is denominated in USD.

Reviewer 3: I don't know what this means: _"[...] has a 2.5x **collateral-backing**"_ and I think the document should be understandable by any reader, so I assume this needs further explanations/clarification 😄

Reviewer: Is it `3.5x` or `2.5x`?

Agents are responsible for posting and maintaining the FLR collateral.

> Additionally, they are responsible for answering redemptions, when users decide they would like to have their underlying asset back.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, they are responsible for answering redemptions, when users decide they want their underlying asset back.
```

XRP, Litecoin, Dogecoin, and Stellar are the first four F-Assets and the addition of more is subject to FLR holder governance.

> F-Asset System allows the supported cryptos to have the capability to run smart contracts without any changes to the underlying blockchain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
F-Asset System gives the supported cryptos the capability to run smart contracts without any changes to the underlying blockchain.
```

> The reason to do so is that nearly 75% of the value on public blockchains cannot be currently used in a trust-less manner with smart contracts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The reason to do so is that nearly 75% of the value on public blockchains cannot be currently used in a trustless manner with smart contracts.
```

Trustless is a valid word, no need for a dash here.

Two important parties in the F-Asset System are responsible for issuing F-Assets: Agents and Originators.

> An originator is a person or an institution who wants to convert their cryptocurrency into an F-asset, and an agent (more likely to be an institution) is a participant on the Flare network who will be issuing the F-asset desired by the originator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An originator is a person or institution that wants to convert their cryptocurrency into an F-asset, and an agent (more likely to be an institution) is a participant on the Flare network that issues the F-asset desired by the originator.
```

Agents are also responsible for posting and managing the FLR collateral used to back the minting of F-Assets.

> Additionally, as F-Asset holders have the right to claim the underlying asset, the agents will be responsible for honoring redemptions promptly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, as F-Asset holders have the right to claim the underlying asset, agents are responsible for honoring redemptions promptly.
```
